# O Brother, How Far Art Thou?

## General Guidance

1. State and prove all non-trivial mathematical results necessary to substantiate your arguments;
2. Do not forget to add appropriate scholarly references at the end of the document;
3. Mathematical expressions also receive punctuation;

## Background

A large portion of the content of this course is concerned with computing high-dimensional integrals via simulation. Today you will be introduced to a simple-looking problem with a complicated closed-form solution and one we can approach using simulation.

Suppose you have a disc $C _{R}$ of radius $R$. Take $p = (p _{x},p _{y})$ and $q= (q _{x}, q _{y}) \in C _{R}$ two points in the disc. Consider the Euclidean distance between $p$ and $q$, $||p -q|| = \sqrt{(p _{x} - q _{x})^{2} + (p _{y}- q _{y})^{2}} = |p - q|$. 

**Problem A:** What is the average distance between pairs of points in $C _{R}$ if they are picked uniformly at random?

## Part I: nuts and bolts

1. To start building intuition, let's solve a related but much simpler problem. Consider an interval $[0,s]$, with $s >0$ and take $x _{1}, x _{2} \in [0,s]$ uniformly at random. Show that the average distance between $x _{1}$ and $x _{2}$ is $s /3$.

`Solution`

We have that $X _{1}, X _{2} \sim \mathcal{U}(0,s)$. Then, $f _{X _{1}}(x _{1}) = f _{X _{2}}(x _{2}) = \frac{1}{s}$, if $x _{1}, x _{2} \in [0,s]$ and zero otherwise. Define 
$$
g(x _{1}, x _{2}) = |x _{1} - x _{2}| =\begin{cases}
 x _{1} - x _{2}, \qquad \text{if } \quad x _{1} \geq x _{2} \\
 x _{2} - x _{1}, \qquad \text{if } \quad x _{1} < x _{2}
\end{cases}
$$
By the independence of $X _{1}$ and $X _{2}$, we have that $f _{X _{1}, X _{2}}(x _{1},x _{2}) = f _{X _{1}}(x _{1})f _{X _{2}}(x _{2}) = \frac{1}{s ^{2}}$.

Therefore, 
$$
\begin{align*}
	\mathbb{E}_{X _{1},X _{2}}[g(x _{1}, x _{2})] &= \int_{0}^{s} \int_{0}^{s} g(x _{1}, x _{2})f _{X _{1}, X _{2}}(x _{1},x _{2})dx _{1}dx _{2} \\
	&= \int_{0}^{s} \int_{0}^{s} g(x _{1}, x _{2})\frac{1}{s ^{2}}dx _{1}dx _{2} = \frac{1}{s ^{2}}\int_{0}^{s} \int_{0}^{s} |x _{1} - x _{2}|dx _{1}dx _{2} \\
	&= \frac{1}{s ^{2}}\int_{0}^{s}\int_{0}^{x _{1}} |x _{1} - x _{2}|dx _{1}dx _{2} + \frac{1}{s ^{2}}\int_{0}^{s}\int_{x _{1}}^{s} |x _{1} - x _{2}|dx _{1}dx _{2} \\
	&= \frac{1}{s ^{2}}\int_{0}^{s}\int_{0}^{x _{2}} (x _{2}- x _{1})dx _{1}dx _{2} + \frac{1}{s ^{2}}\int_{0}^{s}\int_{x _{2}}^{s} (x _{1} -x _{2})dx _{1}dx _{2} \\
	&= \frac{1}{s ^{2}} \int_{0}^{s} \frac{x ^{2}}{2}d x _{2} + \frac{1}{s ^{2}} \int_{0}^{s}\frac{(s - x _{2})^{2}}{2} dx _{2} = \frac{1}{s ^{2}}\left[\frac{s ^{3}}{6}\right] + \frac{1}{s ^{2}} \left[\frac{s ^{3}}{6}\right]\\
	&=\frac{s}{3}
\end{align*}
$$
----------

2. Show that Problem A is equivalent to computing
$$
\begin{equation*}
	I = \frac{1}{\pi ^{2} R ^{4}} \int_{0}^{R}\int_{0}^{R}\int_{0}^{2 \pi}\int_{0}^{2 \pi} \sqrt{r ^{2}_{1} + r ^{2}_{2} - 2 r _{1}r _{2} \cos \phi (\theta _{1}, \theta _{2})}r _{1}r _{2}d \theta _{1}d \theta _{2}dr _{1}dr _{2},
\end{equation*}
$$
where $\phi (\theta _{1}, \theta _{2})$ is the central angle between $r _{1}$ and $r _{2}$.

*Hint: Draw a picture.* 
